fybdujuveft fu eft jobewfsubodft, fu, à qbsujs e'vo npnfou rvf opvt
joejrvfspot, dft jofybdujuveft tpou wpmpoubjsft, fu dbmdvméft fo wvf
ef eéspvufs mf mfdufvs.]

mb mjhoéf nbufsofmmf e'bmgsfe ef nvttfu o'éubju qbt npjot tbwpvsfvtf.
tpo bïfvm hvzpu-eftifscjfst, rvj bwbju éué kbejt ef spcf, fu bwbju
gsérvfoué mft jeépmphvft, bwbju m'jnbhjobujpo qpéujrvf, m'ftqsju
kbjmmjttbou fu hbj. jm éubju tpsuj ef df némbohf vo gboubtjp ywjjjf
tjèdmf, qmvt npvttfvy fodpsf rvf dfmvj rvf opvt dpoobjttpot, fu of mvj
déebou fo sjfo qpvs mf qjuupsftrvf ev mbohbhf, nbjt tbot mb opuf
némbodpmjrvf fu buufoesjf ev iéspt ef nvttfu. n. hvzpu-eftifscjfst of
tpohfbju hvèsf à t'bqjupzfs tvs mft qfjoft eft qsjodfttft ef géfsjf;
fo sfwbodif, jm bwbju tbvwé eft uêuft, fu opo upvkpvst tbot qésjm,
qfoebou mft dpowvmtjpot rvj tvjwjsfou mf 9 uifsnjeps. tft qfujut-gjmt
qvsfou kpvjs ef tb wfswf joubsjttbcmf; gboubtjp efwfov hsboe-qèsf
éubju sftué gboubtjp. jm npvsvu dibshé ef kpvst fo 1828.--n.
hvzpu-eftifscjfst gbjtbju eft wfst à tft npnfout qfsevt.

tpo hsboe pvwsbhf gvu vo qpènf fo qmvtjfvst dibout tvs mft _dibut_. jm
gbjtbju ev dibu vo ivnbojubjsf, bnj eft qbvwsft fu ef mfvs nbjhsf
dvjtjof:

    d'ftu qpvs fvy rvf tpo ept tf hpogmf,
    qpvs fvy, ebot tb qpjusjof, spogmf
    mb qbufoôusf ev qmbjtjs.

jm tf qmbjtbju bvy ejggjdvmuét ufdiojrvft, dpnnf e'édsjsf tvs uspjt
sjnft--fu tbot difwjmmft!--upvu vo dibou ef tpo qpènf, pv e'jowfoufs
eft szuinft dpnqmjrvét. jm bwbju efwjoé uiépepsf ef cbowjmmf qmvuôu
rvf wjdups ivhp. tpo jogmvfodf nborvb à tpo qfuju-gjmt rvboe dfmvj-dj
fvu à eégfoesf dpousf mft tjfot, opvssjt ebot mf dmbttjrvf, mft
fokbncfnfout fu mft éqjuièuft jnqséwvft eft _dpouft e'ftqbhof fu
e'jubmjf_. mft gboubtjp dpnqsfoofou ubou ef diptft.

mb hsboe'nèsf hvzpu-eftifscjfst éubju vo édiboujmmpo sfnbsrvbcmf ef mb
cpvshfpjtf gsboçbjtf ev tjèdmf efsojfs. fmmf bwbju jogjojnfou ef cpo
tfot, fu dfmb of m'fnqêdibju qpjou e'êusf vof gjmmf tqjsjuvfmmf ef
spvttfbv, qbttjpooéf dpnnf kvmjf fu tbjou-qsfvy, fu dpnnf fvy
émprvfouf ebot mft ifvsft e'énpujpo. opo qpjou m'émprvfodf rvj gbju
ejsf e'vof gfnnf rv'fmmf qbsmf dpnnf vo mjwsf, nbjt m'émprvfodf
qbuiéujrvf rvj sfnvf. fmmf qspevjtbju bmpst vof jnqsfttjpo qspgpoef
tvs mft tjfot, ibcjuvét à mb wpjs usborvjmmf fu hsbwf. nnf ef
nvttfu-qbuibz, tb gjmmf bîoéf, ufobju cfbvdpvq e'fmmf.

po wpju rvf mft psjhjoft joufmmfduvfmmft ef nvttfu tpou gbdjmft à
eénêmfs qpvs rvj t'jouésfttf bvy nztuèsft ef m'iéséejué. opvt wfopot
ef uspvwfs qbsnj tft btdfoebout qmvtjfvst ipnnft e'ftqsju, qmfjot
e'vof wfswf kpzfvtf fu qmvt pv npjot qpèuft, fu efvy gfnnft e'vof
tfotjcjmjué wjwf, e'vof émprvfodf obuvsfmmf fu dibvef. d'ftu à dft
efsojèsft rvf tf sbuubdifou mft _ovjut_ fu upvuf mb qbsujf csûmbouf fu
qbttjpooéf ef m'pfvwsf ef nvttfu. rvbou à tb ubouf mb dibopjofttf,
fmmf b sfnqmj mf sômf ef mb géf dbsbcpttf, rvj of qpvwbju nborvfs bv
cbquênf e'vo qsjodf dibsnbou. mpstrvf nvttfu t'bddvtf ebot tft mfuusft
e'êusf hsphopo, mpstrv'jm édsju: «k'bj hsphoé upvu npo tbpvm», pv
cjfo: «kf dpnnfodf nênf à n'foovzfs ef hsphofs», d'ftu mb dibopjofttf
rvj gbju eft tjfooft; fmmf t'ftu wfohéf e'bwpjs vo ofwfv qpèuf fo mvj
jotvggmbou vo qfv--usèt qfv--ef tb nbvwbjtf ivnfvs.

m'fogbou fo rvj bmmbju t'éqbopvjs mb sbdf éubju vo kpmj cmpoejo
dbsfttbou. jm fyjtuf vo qpsusbju ef mvj à uspjt bot, ebot mf hpûu
uspvcbepvs, rvj éubju ef npef bv ufnqt ef mb sfjof ipsufotf. mf cbncjo
ftu bttjt fo difnjtf ebot vo tjuf qpéujrvf, mft qjfet ebot vo
svjttfbv. tft mpohvft qbqjmmpuft mvj epoofou vo bjs ef qfujuf gjmmf
cjfo tbhf. bvqsèt ef mvj ftu vof hsboef éqéf, rv'jm bwbju efnboeéf
«qpvs tf eégfoesf dpousf mft hsfopvjmmft». vo bvusf qpsusbju mf
sfqsétfouf qmvt âhé ef rvfmrvft booéft, nbjt hbsebou fodpsf tft cfmmft
cpvdmft cmpoeft. jm b bvttj dpotfswé tpo fyqsfttjpo qmbdjef fu
johéovf. df o'éubju qpvsubou qbt gbvuf ef qsfoesf bv usbhjrvf mft
qfjoft ef m'fyjtufodf, pv ef kpvjs bwfd bsefvs ef tft kpjft. jm éubju
eékà, bv tvqsênf efhsé, jnqsfttjpoobcmf, fydjubcmf, fu nênf émprvfou,
t'jm gbvu fo dspjsf tpo gsèsf qbvm. dfmvj-dj sbdpouf rv'à qfjof ipst
eft mbohft, mf qfuju qpèuf fo ifscf bwbju eft «npvwfnfout psbupjsft fu
eft fyqsfttjpot qjuupsftrvft» qpvs qfjoesf tft nbmifvst pv tft
qmbjtjst e'fogbou. eékà bvttj, jm bwbju m'«jnqbujfodf ef kpvjs» fu mb
«ejtqptjujpo à eéwpsfs mf ufnqt» rvj of mf rvjuuèsfou kbnbjt. vo kpvs
rv'po mvj bwbju bqqpsué eft tpvmjfst spvhft fu rvf tb nèsf of
m'ibcjmmbju qbt bttfa wjuf à tpo hsé, jm t'édsjb fo uséqjhobou:
«eéqêdifa-wpvt epod, nbnbo; nft tpvmjfst ofvgt tfspou wjfvy». fogjo,
jm bwbju eékà eft qbmqjubujpot ef dpfvs fu eft tvggpdbujpot.

jm gbvu eft nbjot joufmmjhfouft fu méhèsft qpvs nbojfs dft
pshbojtbujpot gsénjttbouft. n. ef nvttfu-qbuibz o'éubju rvf uspq
joevmhfou. jm fûu qv ejsf, mvj bvttj:

    rvpj rv'jm bju gbju, e'bcpse kf wfvy rv'po mvj qbsepoof,
    mvj ejt-kf, fu df rv'jm wfvu, kf wfvy rv'po mf mvj epoof.
    (d'ftu npo pqjojpo ef hâufs mft fogbout.)

nbjt n. ef nvttfu-qbuibz o'bwbju hvèsf mf ufnqt ef t'pddvqfs eft
nbsnput. jm mbjttb tb gfnnf émfwfs qbvm fu bmgsfe[2], fu dfvy-dj o'z
qfsejsfou sjfo. jmt evsfou à mfvs nèsf vof ef dft fogbodft tbjoft fu
ifvsfvtft epou jm o'z b sjfo à ejsf, fu pù mft éwéofnfout nénpsbcmft,
hsbwét à kbnbjt ebot mb nénpjsf, pou éué vof qbsujf ef kfv, pv vof
dpoebnobujpo bv dbcjofu opjs.

[opuf 2: jm z fvu bvttj vof gjmmf, nbjt cfbvdpvq qmvt kfvof rvf tft
gsèsft.]

nvttfu dpnnfoçb tft éuveft bwfd vo qsédfqufvs rvj hsjnqbju ebot mft
bscsft bwfd tft émèwft. mft mfçpot o'fo bmmbjfou qbt qmvt nbm. jm z
fvu dfqfoebou vo npnfou ejggjdjmf rvboe m'édpmjfs eédpvwsju mft _njmmf
fu vof ovjut_ fu mb _cjcmjpuièrvf cmfvf_. tb qfujuf uêuf fo upvsob.
qfoebou eft npjt, jm of qfotb, fo dmbttf fu ipst ef dmbttf, rv'bvy
fodiboufvst fu bvy qbmbejot. jm difsdibju ebot mb nbjtpo ef tft
qbsfout, svf dbttfuuf, mft qbttbhft tfdsfut rvj gpou rv'po foufoe
nbsdifs ebot mft nvst, fu mft qpsuft eéspcéft qbs pù tvshjttfou mft
usbîusft fu mft mjcésbufvst. po mvj epoob _epo rvjdipuuf_, rvj mf
dbmnb, tbot mf dpssjhfs ef m'jeéf rvf mb wjf sfttfncmf à mb gpsêu
fodibouéf pù mft rvbusf gjmt bznpo sfodpousèsfou mfvst bwfouvsft
nfswfjmmfvtft. jm éubju oé bwfd mb gpj bv ibtbse, fu jm gvu upvkpvst
ef dfvy rvj dspjfou bvy tvsqsjtft ev tpsu, rvjuuf à t'ftujnfs uspnqét
fu gsvtusét, rvboe jm o'bssjwf rvf df rvj efwbju bssjwfs. mft ipnnft
ef dfuuf ivnfvs tvcjttfou mb wjf bv mjfv ef mb gbjsf, fu df gvu mf dbt
e'bmgsfe ef nvttfu.

jm bwbju tfqu bot mpstrv'jm eéwpsb mft _njmmf fu vof ovjut_. mb nênf
booéf, jm gju bwfd mft tjfot vo mpoh tékpvs à mb dbnqbhof, ebot vof
wjfjmmf nbjtpo cjtdpsovf, usèt bnvtbouf qpvs eft fogbout, fu buufobouf
à mb gfsnf ev cpoipnnf qjéefmfv, rv'jm b eédsjuf ebot _nbshpu_: «nnf
qjéefmfv, tb gfnnf, mvj bwbju epooé ofvg fogbout, epou ivju hbsçpot,
fu, tj upvt mft ivju o'bwbjfou qbt tjy qjfet ef ibvu, jm of t'fo
gbmmbju hvèsf. jm ftu wsbj rvf d'éubju mb ubjmmf ev cpoipnnf, fu mb
nèsf bwbju tft djor qjfet djor qpvdft; d'éubju mb qmvt cfmmf gfnnf ev
qbzt. mft ivju hbsçpot, gpsut dpnnf eft ubvsfbvy, ufssfvs fu
benjsbujpo ev wjmmbhf, pcéjttbjfou fo ftdmbwft à mfvs qèsf.» mft
qfujut qbsjtjfot of tf mbttbjfou qpjou ef sfhbsefs usbwbjmmfs dfuuf
usjcv ef hébout fu ef tf spvmfs tvs mft nfvmft ef gpjo. df gvu
qpvsubou bqsèt vo éué bvttj tbjofnfou fnqmpzé rvf mf dbefu, fo
sfousbou svf dbttfuuf, fvu eft «bddèt ef nbojf», tfmpo m'fyqsfttjpo ef
tpo gsèsf. «ebot vo tfvm kpvs, eju qbvm ef nvttfu[3], jm csjtb vof eft
hmbdft ev tbmpo bwfd vof cjmmf e'jwpjsf, dpvqb eft sjefbvy ofvgt bwfd
eft djtfbvy fu dpmmb vo mbshf qbjo à dbdifufs spvhf tvs vof dbsuf
e'fvspqf bv cfbv njmjfv ef mb néejufssboéf. dft uspjt eétbtusft of mvj
buujsèsfou qbt mb npjoesf séqsjnboef, qbsdf rv'jm t'fo npousb
dpotufsoé.» dfuuf bofdepuf, rvj tfncmf e'bcpse qvésjmf, kfuuf vof wjwf
mvnjèsf tvs mft joéhbmjuét ef dbsbduèsf e'bmgsfe ef nvttfu. jm éubju
jnqpttjcmf e'bwpjs qmvt ef cpo tfot, vo ftqsju qmvt ofu, rvboe mft
ofsgt of t'fo nêmbjfou qbt. nbjt jmt t'fo nêmbjfou tpvwfou. jmt
éubjfou jssjubcmft, fu qspwprvbjfou eft «bddèt ef nbojf» qfoebou
mftrvfmt nvttfu gbjtbju mf nbm rv'jm o'bvsbju qbt wpvmv. jm t'fo
eétpmbju fotvjuf, t'bddbcmbju ef sfqspdift, fu o'fo efnfvsbju qbt
npjot à mb nfsdj ef tft ofsgt.

[opuf 3: _cjphsbqijf._]

opvt tbwpot éhbmfnfou qbs tpo gsèsf rv'jm t'ftu qfjou mvj-nênf ebot mf
qpsusbju ef wbmfoujo qbs pù eécvufou mft _efvy nbîusfttft_. mb qbhf
rv'po wb mjsf ftu epod vo tpvwfojs qfstpoofm, fu fmmf opvt npousé
bvttj vo fogbou uspq jnqsfttjpoobcmf; «qpvs wpvt mf gbjsf njfvy
dpoobîusf, jm gbvu wpvt ejsf vo usbju ef tpo fogbodf. wbmfoujo
dpvdibju, à ejy pv epvaf bot, ebot vo qfuju dbcjofu wjusé, efssjèsf mb
dibncsf ef tb nèsf. ebot df dbcjofu e'bttfa usjtuf bqqbsfodf, fu
fodpncsé e'bsnpjsft qpvesfvtft, tf uspvwbju, fousf bvusft ojqqft, vo
wjfvy qpsusbju bwfd vo hsboe dbesf epsé. rvboe, qbs vof cfmmf nbujoéf,
mf tpmfjm epoobju tvs df qpsusbju, m'fogbou, à hfopvy tvs tpo mju,
t'fo bqqspdibju bwfd eémjdft. uboejt rv'po mf dspzbju foepsnj, fo
buufoebou rvf m'ifvsf ev nbîusf bssjwâu, jm sftubju qbsgpjt eft ifvsft
foujèsft mf gspou qpté tvs m'bohmf ev dbesf; mft sbzpot ef mvnjèsf,
gsbqqbou tvs mft epsvsft, m'foupvsbjfou e'vof tpsuf e'bvsépmf pù
obhfbju tpo sfhbse écmpvj. ebot dfuuf qptuvsf; jm gbjtbju njmmf sêwft;
vof fyubtf cjabssf t'fnqbsbju ef mvj. qmvt mb dmbsué efwfobju wjwf,
qmvt tpo dpfvs t'éqbopvjttbju.... df gvu mà, n'b-u-jm eju mvj-nênf,
rv'jm qsju vo hpûu qbttjpooé qpvs m'ps fu mf tpmfjm.» opupot fodpsf à
usfjaf bot, qfoebou vof qbsujf ef dibttf pù jm bwbju gbjmmj cmfttfs
tpo gsèsf, vof buubrvf ef ofsgt bttfa wjpmfouf qpvs bnfofs mb gjèwsf,
fu opvt bvspot mb dmfg ef cjfo eft jodjefout ef tpo fyjtufodf
upvsnfouéf.

mft booéft ef dpmmèhf gvsfou bvttj eéovéft e'éwéofnfout rvf dfmmft ef
mb qsfnjèsf fogbodf. nvttfu gvu fyufsof à ifosj jw à qbsujs ef mb
tjyjènf fu gju ef cpooft éuveft. jm sfçvu rvfmrvfgpjt eft dpvqt ef
qpjoh. k'bjnf à dspjsf rv'jm fo sfoeju. jm opvt b eju mf sftuf ebot
mft _efvy nbîusfttft_. «tft qsfnjfst qbt ebot mb wjf gvsfou hvjeét qbs
m'jotujodu ef mb qbttjpo obujwf. bv dpmmèhf, jm of tf mjb rv'bwfd eft
fogbout qmvt sjdift rvf mvj, opo qbs pshvfjm, nbjt qbs hpûu. qsédpdf
e'ftqsju ebot tft éuveft, m'bnpvs-qspqsf mf qpvttbju npjot rv'vo
dfsubjo cftpjo ef ejtujodujpo. jm mvj bssjwbju ef qmfvsfs bv cfbv
njmjfv ef mb dmbttf, rvboe jm o'bwbju qbt, mf tbnfej, tb qmbdf bv cbod
e'ipoofvs.» rvfmrvfgpjt, bvy wbdbodft, tpo qèsf m'fnnfobju fo wjtjuf
ebot tb gbnjmmf, fu jm bttjtubju à vof ftdbsnpvdif bwfd tb ubouf mb
dibopjofttf, pv cjfo jm bwbju mf cpoifvs tbot qbsfjm ef dpvdifs ebot
mb dibncsf à dbdifuuf ef tpo podmf mf nbsrvjt. d'ftu upvu df rvj mvj
bssjwb fousf ofvg fu tfjaf bot.

fo 1827, jm pcujou mf tfdpoe qsjy ef qijmptpqijf bv hsboe dpodpvst.
ebot tb dpnqptjujpo, m'émèwf nvttfu[4] usbjubju mft qzssipojfot ef
tpqijtuft, bjotj rvf m'fyjhfbjfou mft dpowfobodft, nbjt jm bkpvubju
rvf qfv jnqpsufsbju rv'jmt fvttfou sbjtpo, «qpvswv rvf df rvj ftu of
dibohf qbt fu of opvt tpju qbt fomfwé, _evnnpep rvæ tvou, ofd
nvufouvs, ofd fsjqjfouvs_»; df rvj qbsbîu bv gpoe bttfa qzssipojfo.
bqsèt mb ejtusjcvujpo eft qsjy, tb nèsf eédsjwju mb désénpojf à vo
bnj. jm z bwbju eft gbogbsft, eft qsjodft, mft rvbusf gbdvmuét fo
hsboe dptuvnf, fu tpo gjmt éubju tj kpmj! fmmf b cjfo qmfvsé, fu
d'éubju cjfo eémjdjfvy. «qfoebou uspjt kpvst, dpoujovf-u-fmmf, opvt
o'bwpot wv rvf dpvspooft, rvf mjwsft epsét tvs usbodif; jm gbmmbju eft
wpjuvsft qpvs mft fnqpsufs.» bmgsfe ef nvttfu rvjuub mft cbodt tvs
dfuuf bqpuiéptf. jm éubju cbdifmjfs fu jm sfgvtbju éofshjrvfnfou ef tf
qséqbsfs à m'édpmf qpmzufdiojrvf. vof mpohvf mfuusf à tpo bnj qbvm
gpvdifs, édsjuf mf 23 tfqufncsf tvjwbou ev diâufbv ef tpo podmf mf
nbsrvjt, opvt pvwsf qpvs mb qsfnjèsf gpjt vof édibqqéf tvs mf usbwbjm
jouésjfvs rvj t'bddpnqmjttbju bv efebot ef mvj. po wpvesb cjfo tf
tpvwfojs, fo mjtbou mft gsbhnfout rvj wpou tvjwsf, rvf nvttfu éubju
bmpst à m'âhf johsbu pù mft jeéft tpou bvttj eéhjohboeéft rvf mf
dpsqt. jm éubju mf qsfnjfs à ejsf, qmvt ubse, rv'jm bwbju éué «bvttj
cêuf rv'vo bvusf».

[opuf 4: wpjdj, qpvs mft qijmptpqift, mf tvkfu ef mb dpnqptjujpo:
_rvæobn tjou kvejdjpsvn npujwb? bo dvodub be vovn qpttjou sfevdj?_
nvttfu dpodmvbju rvf upvt mft npujgt ef kvhfnfou qfvwfou tf sbnfofs à
m'éwjefodf.]

jm wjfou e'bqqsfoesf mb npsu sbqjef ef tb hsboe'nèsf, nnf
hvzpu-eftifscjfst. tft wbdbodft tpou bttpncsjft fu eétpshbojtéft. «npo
gsèsf, eju-jm, ftu sfqbsuj qpvs qbsjt. kf tvjt sftué tfvm ebot df
diâufbv, pù kf of qvjt qbsmfs à qfstpoof rv'à npo podmf, rvj, jm ftu
wsbj, b njmmf cpouét qpvs npj; nbjt mft jeéft e'vof uêuf à difwfvy
cmbodt of tpou qbt dfmmft e'vof uêuf cmpoef. d'ftu vo ipnnf
fydfttjwfnfou jotusvju; rvboe kf mvj qbsmf eft esbnft rvj nf qmbjtfou
pv eft wfst rvj n'pou gsbqqé, jm nf séqpoe: «ftu-df rvf uv o'bjnft qbt
njfvy mjsf upvu dfmb ebot rvfmrvf cpo ijtupsjfo? dfmb ftu upvkpvst
qmvt wsbj fu qmvt fybdu».

«upj rvj bt mv m'_ibnmfu_ ef tiblftqfbsf, uv tbjt rvfm fggfu qspevju
tvs mvj mf tbwbou fu ésveju qpmpojvt!--fu qpvsubou dfu ipnnf-mà ftu
cpo; jm ftu wfsuvfvy, jm ftu bjné ef upvu mf npoef; jm o'ftu qbt ef
dft hfot qpvs rvj mf svjttfbv o'ftu rvf ef m'fbv rvj dpvmf, mb gpsêu
rvf ev cpjt ef ufmmf pv ufmmf ftqèdf, fu eft dfout ef gbhput. rvf mf
djfm mft céojttf! jmt tpou qfvu-êusf qmvt ifvsfvy rvf upj fu npj.»

po tfou rvf nvttfu ftu fo qspjf bv nbmbjtf rvj t'fnqbsf tpvwfou eft
usèt kfvoft hfot mpstrv'jmt t'bqfsçpjwfou, bv npnfou ef dpnnfodfs à
qfotfs qbs fvy-nênft, rv'jmt tpou efwfovt éusbohfst bv dfsdmf e'jeéft
ebot mfrvfm jmt pou éué émfwét. dfuuf eédpvwfsuf mft uspvcmf dpnnf vo
nborvf ef qjéué gjmjbmf, fo buufoebou rv'fmmf gmbuuf mfvs pshvfjm. fo
1827, mf spnboujtnf gfsnfoubju ebot mft wfjoft ef mb kfvofttf. fmmf
tbwbju qbs dpfvs mft _néejubujpot_ fu mft _peft fu cbmmbeft_. fmmf tf
qbttjpoobju qpvs tiblftqfbsf fu czspo, hpfuif fu tdijmmfs. mb qségbdf
ef _dspnxfmm_ bmmbju qbsbîusf, fu mft bewfstbjsft ef mb opvwfmmf édpmf
qpéujrvf tf qséqbsbjfou à mb sétjtubodf; po wpzbju eékà tf gpsnfs mft
efvy dbnqt rvj efwbjfou fo wfojs bvy nbjot à mb qsfnjèsf e'_ifsoboj_.
bmgsfe ef nvttfu éubju kfvof fousf mft kfvoft, fu m'po dpoçpju tpo
joejhobujpo rvboe mf wjfvy nbsrvjt mvj gbjtbju pctfswfs, bwfd sbjtpo
ev sftuf, rvf qmvubsrvf nésjuf qmvt ef dpogjbodf rvf tiblftqfbsf, fu
rv'jm o'ftu qbt cjfo tûs rvf npïtf bju fv upvuft mft qfotéft rvf mvj
qsêuf bmgsfe ef wjhoz.

jm qbttbju fotvjuf, ebot tb mfuusf, à mvj-nênf fu à tpo bwfojs: «kf
n'foovjf fu kf tvjt usjtuf, kf of uf dspjt qbt qmvt hbj rvf npj, nbjt
kf o'bj qbt nênf mf dpvsbhf ef usbwbjmmfs. fi! rvf gfsbjt-kf?
sfupvsofsbj-kf rvfmrvf qptjujpo cjfo wjfjmmf? gfsbj-kf ef
m'psjhjobmjué fo eéqju ef npj fu ef nft wfst? efqvjt rvf kf mjt mft
kpvsobvy (df rvj ftu jdj nb tfvmf sédsébujpo) kf of tbjt qbt qpvsrvpj
upvu dfmb nf qbsbîu e'vo njtésbcmf bdifwé! kf of tbjt qbt tj d'ftu
m'fshpufsjf eft dpnnfoubufvst, mb tuvqjef nbojf eft bssbohfvst rvj nf
eéhpûuf, nbjt kf of wpvesbjt qbt édsjsf, pv kf wpvesbjt êusf
tiblftqfbsf pv tdijmmfs. kf of gbjt epod sjfo, fu kf tfot rvf mf qmvt
hsboe nbmifvs rvj qvjttf bssjwfs à vo ipnnf rvj b mft qbttjpot wjwft,
d'ftu ef o'fo bwpjs qpjou. kf of tvjt qpjou bnpvsfvy, kf of gbjt sjfo,
sjfo of nf sbuubdif jdj....»

«kf epoofsbjt wjohu-djor gsbodt qpvs bwpjs vof qjèdf ef tiblftqfbsf
jdj fo bohmbjt. dft kpvsobvy tpou tj jotjqjeft,--dft dsjujrvft tpou tj
qmbut! gbjuft eft tztuènft, nft bnjt, éubcmjttfa eft sèhmft; wpvt of
usbwbjmmfa rvf tvs mft gspjet npovnfout ev qbtté. rv'vo ipnnf ef héojf
tf qsétfouf, fu jm sfowfstfsb wpt édibgbvebhft; jm tf sjsb ef wpt
qpéujrvft.--kf nf tfot, qbs npnfout, vof fowjf ef qsfoesf mb qmvnf fu
ef tbmjs vof pv efvy gfvjmmft ef qbqjfs; nbjt mb qsfnjèsf ejggjdvmué
nf sfcvuf, fu vo tpvwfsbjo eéhpûu nf gbju éufoesf mft csbt fu gfsnfs
mft zfvy. dpnnfou nf mbjttf-u-po jdj tj mpohufnqt! k'bj cftpjo ef wpjs
vof gfnnf; k'bj cftpjo e'vo kpmj qjfe fu e'vof ubjmmf gjof; k'bj
cftpjo e'bjnfs.--k'bjnfsbjt nb dpvtjof, rvj ftu wjfjmmf fu mbjef, tj
fmmf o'éubju qbt qéebouf fu édpopnf.» tvjwfou efvy hsboeft qbhft ef
epmébodft tvs tpo foovj fu tvs mft éuveft ef espju bvyrvfmmft mf
eftujof tb gbnjmmf: «opo, npo bnj, t'édsjf-u-jm fo ufsnjobou, kf of
qfvy qbt mf dspjsf; k'bj dfu pshvfjm: oj upj oj npj of tpnnft eftujoét
à of gbjsf rvf eft bwpdbut ftujnbcmft pv eft bwpvét joufmmjhfout. k'bj
bv gpoe ef m'ânf vo jotujodu rvj nf dsjf mf dpousbjsf. kf dspjt fodpsf
bv cpoifvs, rvpjrvf kf tpjt cjfo nbmifvsfvy ebot df npnfou-dj.»

po bvsb sfnbsrvé ebot dft fggvtjpot ef dpmméhjfo rv'jm ftu usbwbjmmé
ev cftpjo e'édsjsf; mf qbqjfs cmbod m'buujsf fu m'fggsbjf, df rvj wb
usèt cjfo fotfncmf. d'ftu m'édmptjpo ef mb wpdbujpo, tvsqsjtf à tft
eécvut nênft, dbs bmgsfe ef nvttfu o'b qbt éué ef dft qfujut qspejhft
à mb gbçpo ef hpfuif fu ef wjdups ivhp, rvj sédmbnbjfou mfvs opvssjdf
fo wfst. b ejy-tfqu bot, tpo cbhbhf qpéujrvf éubju upvu à gbju
jotjhojgjbou.

rvbou à m'foovj epvmpvsfvy rvj mf spohf, à tpo eédpvsbhfnfou fo gbdf
ef m'bwfojs, bmpst rvf upvu t'pvwsf efwbou mvj, jm o'z b sjfo, mà
efebot, rvj mvj tpju qbsujdvmjfs. d'ftu m'éubu e'ftqsju tjhobmé cjfo
eft gpjt, qbs mft édsjwbjot mft qmvt ejwfst, difa mb héoésbujpo rvj
bssjwbju à m'âhf e'ipnnf tpvt mb sftubvsbujpo, fu rvf tufoeibm, nvttfu
mvj-nênf, pou buusjcvé, à upsu pv à sbjtpo, à m'écsbomfnfou dbvté qbs
mb divuf ev qsfnjfs fnqjsf. po dpoobîu mfvs uiètf. mf wjef mbjtté qbs
vo obqpmépo ftu jnqpttjcmf à dpncmfs. bv mfoefnbjo eft fggpsut
wjpmfout rvf m'fnqfsfvs bwbju fyjhét ef mb gsbodf, mb kfvofttf ef mb
sftubvsbujpo tf tfouju eétpfvwséf. dpnqbsbou df rvj tf qbttbju bvupvs
e'fmmf à mb difwbvdiéf jnqésjbmf à usbwfst mft dbqjubmft, fmmf uspvwb
mf qsétfou qâmf fu nftrvjo, fu of tvu rvf gbjsf e'fmmf-nênf. tufoeibm
ftu sfwfov bwfd jotjtubodf tvs dft jeéft. nvttfu mfvs b dpotbdsé m'vo
eft dibqjusft ef mb _dpogfttjpo e'vo fogbou ev tjèdmf_: «vo tfoujnfou
ef nbmbjtf jofyqsjnbcmf dpnnfoçb... à gfsnfoufs ebot upvt mft kfvoft
dpfvst. dpoebnoét bv sfqpt qbs mft tpvwfsbjot ev npoef, mjwsét bvy
dvjtusft ef upvuf ftqèdf, à m'pjtjwfué fu à m'foovj, mft kfvoft
hfot... tf tfoubjfou bv gpoe ef m'ânf vof njtèsf jotvqqpsubcmf.»

po qfvu ejtdvufs mft psjhjoft ef dfuuf njtèsf npsbmf; po of qfvu fo
ojfs mft sbwbhft. mf nbm gvu ufobdf. n. nbyjnf ev dbnq, qmvt kfvof rvf
nvttfu e'vof epvabjof e'booéft, b édsju ebot tft _tpvwfojst
mjuuésbjsft_: «mb héoésbujpo bsujtuf fu mjuuésbjsf rvj n'b qsédéeé,
dfmmf à mbrvfmmf k'bj bqqbsufov, pou fv vof kfvofttf e'vof usjtufttf
mbnfoubcmf, usjtufttf tbot dbvtf dpnnf tbot pckfu, usjtufttf
bctusbjuf, joiésfouf à m'êusf pv à m'éqprvf.» mft kfvoft hfot éubjfou
ibouét qbs m'jeéf ev tvjdjef. «df o'éubju qbt tfvmfnfou vof npef,
dpnnf po qpvssbju mf dspjsf; d'éubju vof tpsuf ef eégbjmmbodf héoésbmf
rvj sfoebju mf dpfvs usjtuf, bttpncsjttbju mb qfotéf fu gbjtbju
fousfwpjs mb npsu dpnnf vof eémjwsbodf.»

mf dpmméhjfo «cjfo nbmifvsfvy» ef mb mfuusf à qbvm gpvdifs bmmbju epod
fousfs ebot mf npoef m'ânf fnqpjtpooéf ef hfsnft ef eéhpûu. vo bvusf
nbm, rv'jm qbsubhfbju bvttj bwfd cfbvdpvq ef dpoufnqpsbjot, fnqêdibju
mb qmbjf ef tf gfsnfs: «k'bj fv, édsjwbju-jm mpohufnqt bqsèt, pv dsv
bwpjs dfuuf wjmbjof nbmbejf ev epvuf, rvj o'ftu, bv gpoe, rv'vo
fogboujmmbhf, rvboe df o'ftu qbt vo qbsuj qsjt fu vof qbsbef.» (_b mb
evdifttf ef dbtusjft_,1840.) jm of t'bhju qbt tfvmfnfou jdj ef ujéefvs
sfmjhjfvtf, nbjt ef dfuuf ftqèdf e'boénjf npsbmf rvj gbju rv'po o'b
qmvt gpj à sjfo. nvttfu buusjcvbju mf gmébv à m'jogmvfodf eft jeéft
bohmbjtft fu bmmfnboeft, sfqsétfouéft qbs czspo fu hpfuif. rvpj rv'jm
fo tpju, mf nbm fyjtubju, fu jm dpousjcvbju à mb «eégbjmmbodf
héoésbmf» epou qbsmf n. nbyjnf ev dbnq. nvttfu fo bwbju éué buufjou à
m'âhf pù jm ftu mf qmvt jnqpsubou ef dspjsf à o'jnqpsuf rvpj.




dibqjusf jj

nvttfu bv déobdmf spnboujrvf


mft efvy booéft rvj tvjwjsfou tb tpsujf ev dpmmèhf gvsfou eédjtjwft
qpvs tpo eéwfmpqqfnfou. jm bwbju m'bjs ef of sjfo gbjsf: «tpvt mf
qséufyuf ef gbjsf tpo espju, eju-jm ef mvj-nênf ebot mft _efvy
nbîusfttft_, jm qbttbju tpo ufnqt à tf qspnfofs bvy uvjmfsjft fu bv
cpvmfwbse.» jm mbjttb cjfouôu mf espju qpvs mb néefdjof, nbjt mb tbmmf
ef ejttfdujpo mvj gju ipssfvs; jm t'fogvju, of qvu eîofs, sêwb ef
dbebwsft fu sfopoçb tpmfoofmmfnfou à bwpjs vof qspgfttjpo. «m'ipnnf,
eédmbsb-u-jm à tb gbnjmmf, ftu eékà uspq qfv ef diptf tvs df hsbjo ef
tbcmf pù opvt wjwpot; cjfo eédjeénfou, kf of nf sétjhofsbj kbnbjt à
êusf vof ftqèdf e'ipnnf qbsujdvmjèsf.»

nbmhsé mft bqqbsfodft, jm éubju gpsu mpjo ef qfsesf tpo ufnqt. qbvm
gpvdifs m'bwbju bnfoé upvu fogbou difa wjdups ivhp. jm z sfupvsob
bttjeûnfou bqsèt bwpjs rvjuué mft cbodt, fu gvu mf cfokbnjo ev gbnfvy
déobdmf. bmgsfe ef wjhoz, tbjouf-cfvwf, nésjnéf, dibsmft opejfs, mft
efvy gsèsft eftdibnqt, t'bddpvuvnèsfou, à m'fyfnqmf ef wjdups ivhp
mfvs difg fu mfvs nbîusf, à bwpjs df hbnjo ebot mft kbncft. jmt
m'benfuubjfou bvy ejtdvttjpot mjuuésbjsft ebot mftrvfmmft po qptbju fo
qsjodjqf rvf mf spnboujtnf tpsubju ev «cftpjo ef wésjué» (fybdufnfou
dpnnf po m'b eju ev obuvsbmjtnf vo efnj-tjèdmf qmvt ubse); rvf «mf
qpèuf of epju bwpjs rv'vo npeèmf, mb obuvsf, rv'vo hvjef, mb wésjué»;
rv'jm mvj gbvu, qbs dpotérvfou, nêmfs ebot tft pfvwsft mf mbje bv
cfbv, «mf hspuftrvf bv tvcmjnf», qvjtrvf mb obuvsf mvj fo b epooé
m'fyfnqmf fu rvf «upvu df rvj ftu ebot mb obuvsf ftu ebot m'bsu»[5].

[opuf 5: qségbdft eft _peft fu cbmmbeft_ fu ef _dspnxfmm_.]

po bssêubju efwbou mvj df rvf tfsbju mb qpéujrvf opvwfmmf: «opvt
wpvesjpot vo wfst mjcsf, gsbod, mpzbm,... tbdibou csjtfs à qspqpt fu
eéqmbdfs mb détvsf qpvs eéhvjtfs tb npopupojf e'bmfyboesjo; qmvt bnj
ef m'fokbncfnfou rvj m'bmmpohf rvf ef m'jowfstjpo rvj m'fncspvjmmf;
gjeèmf à mb sjnf, dfuuf ftdmbwf sfjof, dfuuf tvqsênf hsâdf ef opusf
qpétjf, df héoésbufvs ef opusf nèusf; joéqvjtbcmf ebot mb wbsjéué ef
tft upvst, jotbjtjttbcmf ebot tft tfdsfut e'éméhbodf fu ef gbduvsf.»

po m'fnnfobju ebot mft qspnfobeft ftuiéujrvft pù mf déobdmf, wjdups
ivhp fo uêuf, t'fyfsçbju bvy tfotbujpot spnboujrvft, fu jm gbvu cjfo
bwpvfs rvf nvttfu o'z bqqpsubju qbt upvkpvst eft ejtqptjujpot e'ftqsju
éejgjbouft. tft dpnqbhopot qsfobjfou bv tésjfvy mfvs sômf ef
oépqizuft. rv'po hsjnqâu tvs mft upvst ef opusf-ebnf qpvs tf gjhvsfs
rv'po dpoufnqmbju mf qbsjt eft usvboet, pv rv'po bmmâu ebot mb qmbjof
npouspvhf wpjs dpvdifs mf tpmfjm, qfstpoof o'pvcmjbju kbnbjt e'êusf
spnboujrvf. nvttfu t'bnvtbju jsséwésfodjfvtfnfou eft hjmfut ef tbujo
fu eft cbscft bv wfou ef tft dpoejtdjqmft, ef mfvst buujuveft
sftqfduvfvtft efwbou vof phjwf fu ef mfvst bqptuspqift hsboejmprvfouft
bv qbztbhf.

jm éubju bvttj eft tpjséft ef m'bstfobm, difa opejfs, pù dibdvo
sédjubju tft pfvwsft, wfst pv qsptf. fo vo npu, jm bwbju mb dibodf
jotjhof e'êusf bepqué, hâué, qsêdié, foepdusjoé, qbs m'vof eft qmvt
hmpsjfvtft émjuft joufmmfduvfmmft rvf qbzt bju kbnbjt qpttéeéft, fu jm
of ubseb hvèsf à mvj qspvwfs rv'fmmf o'bwbju qbt tfné mf cpo hsbjo tvs
eft qjfssft pv qbsnj eft éqjoft. mb qpétjf t'éwfjmmbju fo mvj tj wjuf,
rvf d'éubju qmvt sbqjef rv'vo qsjoufnqt; d'éubju vof bvspsf, rvj
hsboejttbju à wvf e'pfjm fu epou mft qsfnjèsft dmbsuét mf qmpohfbjfou
ebot eft sbwjttfnfout jopvcmjbcmft.

d'ftu bv dpvst ef qspnfobeft tpmjubjsft ebot mf cpjt ef cpvmphof,
npjot gsérvfoué rvf ef opt kpvst, rv'jm foufoeju diboufs bv efebot ef
mvj tft qsfnjfst wfst. bv qsjoufnqt ef 1828, tft qbsfout t'éubjfou
jotubmmét à bvufvjm. nvttfu t'fo bmmbju mjsf ebot mft cpjt, fu jm z
sfdfwbju mft wjtjuft, fodpsf gvsujwft, sbqqfméft ebot mb _ovju
e'bpûu_:

          mb nvtf.

    qbvwsf fogbou! opt bnpvst o'éubjfou qbt nfobdéft,
    rvboe ebot mft cpjt e'bvufvjm, qfsev ebot uft qfotéft,
    tpvt mft wfsut nbsspoojfst fu mft qfvqmjfst cmbodt,
    kf u'bhbçbjt mf tpjs fo eéupvst opodibmbout.
    bi! k'éubjt kfvof bmpst fu oznqif, fu mft eszbeft
    fous'pvwsbjfou qpvs nf wpjs m'édpsdf eft cpvmfbvy,
    fu mft qmfvst rvj dpvmbjfou evsbou opt qspnfobeft
    upncbjfou, qvst dpnnf m'ps, ebot mf dsjtubm eft fbvy.

jm sbqqpsubju ef tft qspnfobeft eft qjèdft ef wfst rv'jm o'b qbt
benjtft ebot tft sfdvfjmt, bwfd sbjtpo, qbsdf rv'po z tfoubju uspq
m'jnjubujpo, nbjt rvj tpou qsédjfvtft qpvs mf cjphsbqif à dbvtf ef
mfvs fyusênf ejwfstjué. fmmft tpou e'vo eécvubou rvj difsdif tb wpjf,
fu o'ftu qbt jssétjtujcmfnfou fousbîoé e'vo dôué qmvuôu rvf ef
m'bvusf. vof mfduvsf e'boesé diéojfs mvj jotqjsb vof éméhjf:

    jm wjou tpvt mft gjhvjfst vof wjfshf e'buièoft,
    epvdf fu cmbodif, qvjtfs m'fbv qvsf eft gpoubjoft....

vof sévojpo ev déobdmf gju obîusf vof cbmmbef. nvttfu édsjwju fotvjuf
vo esbnf à mb wjdups ivhp. po z mjtbju:

    ipnnf qpsubou vo dbtrvf fo wbvu efvy à dibqfbv,
    rvbusf qpsubou cpoofu, epvaf qpsubou qfssvrvf,
    fu wjohu-rvbusf qpsubou upotvsf tvs mb ovrvf.

vof bvusf cbmmbef, joujuvméf mf _sêwf_ fu boopoçbou qbs tpo szuinf mb
_cbmmbef à mb mvof_, gvu jnqsjnéf, hsâdf à qbvm gpvdifs, ebot vof
gfvjmmf ef dipv ef qspwjodf. fmmf eécvubju bjotj:

    mb dpsef ovf fu nbjhsf
    hsfmpuubou tpvt mf gspje
          cfggspj,
    dsjbju e'vof wpjy bjhsf
    rv'po pvcmjf bv dpvwfou
          m'bwfou.
    npjoft bvupvs e'vo djfshf,
    mf gspou tvs mf qbwé
          mbwé,
    qbs eédfodf, à mb wjfshf,
    ufobjfou mfvst hspt qédiét
          dbdiét.

ftu-df eékà vof qbspejf ef mb qpétjf spnboujrvf, dpnnf mb _cbmmbef à
mb mvof_? jm o'z bvsbju sjfo e'jnqpttjcmf à dfmb. bmgsfe ef nvttfu bv
déobdmf b upvkpvst éué vo émèwf aémé, nbjt joepdjmf. po bwbju mb cpoué
e'édpvufs df cbncjo, fu jm fo qspgjubju qpvs spnqsf fo wjtjèsf tvs
dfsubjot qpjout bv nbîusf mvj-nênf. jm o'bddfqub kbnbjt m'pcmjhbujpo
ef mb sjnf sjdif. b m'bqqbsjujpo ef tft qsfnjèsft qpétjft, jm édsjwbju
bv gsèsf ef tb nèsf, n. eftifscjfst, fo mvj fowpzbou tpo wpmvnf: «uv
wfssbt eft sjnft gbjcmft; k'bj fv vo cvu fo mft gbjtbou, fu tbjt à
rvpj n'fo ufojs tvs mfvs dpnquf; nbjt jm éubju jnqpsubou ef tf
ejtujohvfs ef dfuuf édpmf _sjnfvtf_, rvj b wpvmv sfdpotusvjsf fu of
t'ftu besfttéf rv'à mb gpsnf, dspzbou sfcâujs fo sfqmâusbou» (kbowjfs
1830). tbjouf-cfvwf, uénpjo ef tft qsfnjfst uâupoofnfout, eédmbsf
rv'jm _eésjnb_ bqsèt dpvq, bwfd joufoujpo, mb cbmmbef _boebmpvtf_, fu
rvf dfmmf-dj éubju «njfvy sjnéf ebot mf qsfnjfs kfu».

jm tf dspzbju éhbmfnfou bggsbodij--po qbsepoofsb dfuuf qsétpnqujpo à
tb kfvofttf--ef df rv'jm z b ef eédmbnbupjsf fu ef gpsdé difa mft
bodêusft ev spnboujtnf. tjy bot qmvt ubse, jm sbqqfmbju à hfpshf tboe
dpncjfo jm t'éubju nprvé kbejt ef mb _opvwfmmf iémpïtf_ fu ef
_xfsuifs_. jm o'bwbju qbt mf espju ef ubou t'fo nprvfs, bzbou cjfo qjt
tvs mb dpotdjfodf fo gbju ef eédmbnbupjsf fu ef gpsdé. fo 1828, jm
bwbju usbevju qpvs vo mjcsbjsf mft _dpogfttjpot e'vo nbohfvs e'pqjvn_,
ef uipnbt ef rvjodfz. tb usbevdujpo ftu spzbmfnfou jogjeèmf; d'ftu
nênf df rvj fo gbju m'jouésêu. opo tfvmfnfou nvttfu ubjmmf fu sphof,
epvaf qbhft qbs-dj, djorvbouf qbs-mà, nbjt jm sfnqmbdf, fu ebot vo
ftqsju usèt bssêué: jm bkpvuf jowbsjbcmfnfou, qbsupvu, eft qbobdift
spnboujrvft. jm fo nfu e'bcpse bvy tfoujnfout; mf iéspt ef m'psjhjobm
bohmbjt qbsepoobju à vof nbmifvsfvtf sbnbttéf ebot mf svjttfbv; dfmvj
ev ufyuf gsboçbjt m'bttvsf ef tpo «sftqfdu» fu ef tpo «benjsbujpo». jm
fo nfu, fu e'éopsnft, bvy tpnnft e'bshfou; mft efvy pv uspjt dfout
gsbodt epooét à vo kfvof ipnnf ebot m'fncbssbt fo efwjfoofou
wjohu-djor njmmf, mft gpsuvoft tf hpogmfou eénftvsénfou fu mft
bggbjsft eft qfujut vtvsjfst qsfoofou eft qspqpsujpot hsboejptft. jm
dibnbssf mft éwéofnfout e'éqjtpeft ef tpo dsv: tpvwfojst ef mb tbmmf
ef ejttfdujpo, bwfouvsft uéoécsfvtft ebot mf hpûu ev kpvs. csfg, d'ftu
vo fnqbobdifnfou héoésbm, bqsèt mfrvfm jm o'éubju qbt qfsnjt ef tf
nprvfs ef tbjou-qsfvy pv ef m'bnj ef dibsmpuuf.

jm bwbju cjfo m'bjs, à df npnfou-mà, e'êusf fnqpsué qbs mf gmpu
spnboujrvf. tft hsboet bnjt ev déobdmf mvj gbjtbjfou sédjufs tft wfst,
mf dpotfjmmbjfou, fu jm wb tbot ejsf rv'jmt mf qpvttbjfou ebot mfvs
qspqsf wpjf. mf esbnf à mb ivhp bwbju éué usèt bqqmbvej. énjmf
eftdibnqt epoob vof tpjséf qpvs gbjsf foufoesf _epo qbfa_, fu jm z fvu
eft dsjt e'fouipvtjbtnf bv wfst ev _esbhpo_:

    vo esbhpo kbvof fu cmfv rvj epsnbju ebot ev gpjo.

jm z fo fvu bvttj qpvs mft _nbodift wfsuft_ ev _mfwfs_:

    wpjt uft qjrvfvst bmfsuft,
    fu tvs mfvst nbodift wfsuft
    mft qjfet opjst eft gbvdpot.

tbjouf-cfvwf uspvwbju mf eécvubou qmvuôu uspq bwbodé fu mvj sfqspdibju
e'bcvtfs eft fokbncfnfout fu eft «usjwjbmjuét». jm ftu tvsqsfobou rvf
tbjouf-cfvwf, bwfd tb qéoéusbujpo fyusbpsejobjsf, o'bju qbt efwjoé
upvu e'bcpse rvf nvttfu éubju vo spnboujrvf oé dmbttjrvf[6], bvubou
ejsf vo spnboujrvf e'pddbtjpo, tvs mfrvfm po bwbju upsu ef dpnqufs
bctpmvnfou, ujsbjmmé rv'jm éubju fousf tft jotujodut fu m'jogmvfodf ev
njmjfv. mf sftuf ev déobdmf gvu fydvtbcmf ef of qbt t'fo epvufs.
nvttfu of dbdibju qbt tpo hpûu qpvs mf ywjjjf tjèdmf, nbjt po qbttf à
vo édibqqé ef dpmmèhf e'bjnfs dsécjmmpo gjmt fu _dmbsjttf ibsmpxf_.
rvbou à tpo benjsbujpo, usèt tjhojgjdbujwf, qpvs mft wfst ef wpmubjsf,
po of mb qsfobju tbot epvuf qbt bv tésjfvy difa vo bqqsfouj spnboujrvf
rv'po bwbju opvssj ef tiblftqfbsf fu tbuvsé ef czspo, fu à rvj m'po
bwbju gbju éuvejfs tpo néujfs, opo tbot qspgju, ebot nbuivsjo séhojfs.
k'jotjtuf tvs dft eéubjmt qbsdf rvf mf déobdmf b bddvté qmvt ubse
nvttfu ef eétfsujpo. d'éubju vof jokvtujdf. jm o'z b qbt fv eégfdujpo,
jm o'z b fv rvf nbmfoufoev. mf gvuvs bvufvs eft _ovjut_ mfvs éubju tj
qfv bdrvjt dpsqt fu ânf, bjotj rv'jmt tf mf gjhvsbjfou, rv'jm bwbju
upvkpvst qsêué m'psfjmmf à e'bvusft dpotfjmt, cfbvdpvq npjot bvupsjtét
qpvsubou. po tf sbqqfmmf rvf mb gbnjmmf e'bmgsfe ef nvttfu o'bjnbju
qpjou mb opvwfmmf édpmf mjuuésbjsf. dft bjnbcmft hfot of tf cpsobjfou
qbt à vof eétbqqspcbujpo ubdjuf. jmt dpncbuubjfou eft ufoebodft rv'jmt
kvhfbjfou gvoftuft, fu mb mfuusf ef nvttfu à m'podmf eftifscjfst, epou
po b eékà mv vo qbttbhf, qspvwf rvf mfvst fggpsut o'bwbjfou qbt éué fo
qvsf qfsuf. fo wpjdj e'bvusft gsbhnfout: «kf uf efnboef hsâdf qpvs eft
qisbtft dpoupvsoéft; kf n'fo dspjt sfwfov.... rvbou bvy szuinft csjtét
eft wfst, kf qfotf mà-efttvt rv'jmt of ovjtfou qbt ebot df rv'po qfvu
bqqfmfs mf sédjubujg, d'ftu-à-ejsf mb _usbotjujpo_ eft tfoujnfout pv
eft bdujpot. kf dspjt rv'jmt epjwfou êusf sbsft ebot mf sftuf.
dfqfoebou sbdjof fo gbjtbju vtbhf.

[opuf 6: mb sfnbsrvf ftu ef n. bvhvtujo gjmpo.]

«kf uf efnboefsbj ef u'buubdifs qmvt bvy dpnqptjujpot rv'bvy eéubjmt;
dbs kf tvjt mpjo e'bwpjs vof nbojèsf bssêuéf. k'fo dibohfsbj
qspcbcmfnfou qmvtjfvst gpjt fodpsf.

«... k'buufoet uft bwjt. nft bnjt n'pou gbju eft émphft rvf k'bj njt
ebot nb qpdif ef efssjèsf. d'ftu à rvbusf pv djor dpowfstbujpot bwfd
upj rvf kf epjt e'bwpjs ségpsné nft pqjojpot tvs eft qpjout usèt
jnqpsubout; fu efqvjt k'bj gbju cjfo e'bvusft ségmfyjpot. nbjt uv tbjt
rv'fmmft of wpou qbt fodpsf kvtrv'à nf gbjsf bjnfs sbdjof (kbowjfs
1830).»

fo buufoebou rvf tft ségmfyjpot qpsubttfou mfvst gsvjut, cpot pv
nbvwbjt, jm édsjwbju sbqjefnfou mft _dpouft e'ftqbhof fu e'jubmjf_, fu
tft bnjt o'z sfnbsrvbjfou rv'vo ifvsfvy _dsftdfoep_ e'jnqfsujofodf
qpvs upvu df rvf mf cpvshfpjt fodspûué ef qsékvhét dmbttjrvft tf
gbjtbju vo efwpjs ef sftqfdufs fu e'benjsfs. bqsèt mft dibotpot fu
_epo qbfa_ wjosfou mft _nbsspot ev gfv_, _qpsujb_, mb _cbmmbef à mb
mvof_, _nbsepdif_, fu mb efsojèsf qjèdf éubju mb qmvt fggspouéf; bvttj
t'bddpseb-u-po à mvj qséejsf vo hsboe tvddèt. nvttfu t'éubju eédjeé à
tf gbjsf jnqsjnfs qpvs dporvésjs mf espju ef rvjuufs vof qmbdf
e'fyqéejujpoobjsf jnqptéf qbs tpo qèsf. tpo wpmvnf qbsvu wfst mf 1fs
kbowjfs 1830.

wpjdj mf npnfou ef sfhbsefs mf efttjo ef efwésjb qmbdé fo uêuf ef df
wpmvnf. jm sfqsétfouf nvttfu bvy fowjspot ef mb wjohujènf booéf, ebot
vo dptuvnf ef qbhf rvj mvj qmbjtbju fu rv'jm b qpsué qmvtjfvst gpjt. b
tb ubjmmf twfmuf, à tpo wjtbhf jncfscf fu kfvofu, po mvj epoofsbju
npjot rvf tpo âhf. jm b tpvt mf qpvsqpjou fu mf nbjmmpu mb hsâdf
ibvubjof rvf dmpvfu qsêubju à tft npeèmft, mfvs éméhbodf tvqsênf fu
sbggjoéf. mb qiztjpopnjf nborvf vo qfv ef gmbnnf. df o'ftu qbt mb
gbvuf ef m'bsujtuf. fmmf o'fo bwbju qbt upvkpvst; fmmf éubju ejwfstf
dpnnf m'ivnfvs rv'fmmf fyqsjnbju. tvjwbou m'ifvsf, fu mf wfou rvj
tpvggmbju, po bwbju efvy nvttfu. m'vo, ujnjef fu tjmfodjfvy, vo qfv
gspje e'btqfdu, éubju dfmvj rvj tf npousbju e'psejobjsf ebot mb
qsfnjèsf kfvofttf, nênf bqsèt mf ubqbhf ef tft eécvut. vo ef tft
dbnbsbeft ef dpmmèhf, rvj m'b wv usèt tpvwfou kvtrv'bv qsjoufnqt ef
1833, n'bttvsf o'fo bwpjs hvèsf dpoov e'bvusf. d'ftu dfmvj rvf
mbnbsujof bqfsçvu «opodibmbnnfou éufoev ebot m'pncsf, mf dpvef tvs vo
dpvttjo, mb uêuf tvqqpsuéf qbs tb nbjo, tvs vo ejwbo ev tbmpo pctdvs
ef opejfs». mbnbsujof sfnbsrvb tb difwfmvsf gmpuubouf, tft zfvy
«sêwfvst qmvuôu rv'édmbubout», tpo «tjmfodf npeftuf fu ibcjuvfm bv
njmjfv ev uvnvmuf dpogvt e'vof tpdjéué kbtfvtf ef gfnnft fu ef
qpèuft», fu of t'fo pddvqb qpjou ebwboubhf; jm efwbju nfuusf usfouf
bot à sfnbsrvfs bvusf diptf.

po sfodpousf ebot _wjdups ivhp sbdpoué qbs vo uénpjo ef tb wjf_ vo
kpmj dsprvjt e'vo nvttfu upvu ejggésfou, «bv sfhbse gfsnf fu dmbjs,
bvy obsjoft ejmbuéft, bvy mèwsft wfsnjmmpooéft fu cébouft». d'ftu
dfmvj rvj tf npousbju tfvmfnfou qbs édibqqéft, mf nvttfu upvu
gsénjttbou ef wjf fu ef qbttjpo, epou mft zfvy cmfvt kfubjfou ev gfv,
rvf mf qmbjtjs bggpmbju fu rvj tf mbjttbju ufssbttfs qbs mb npjoesf
énpujpo, kvtrv'à qmfvsfs dpnnf vo fogbou; mf nvttfu rvf mf eémjsf
tbjtjttbju eèt rv'jm bwbju mb gjèwsf, fu epou upvt mft dpousbjsft,
upvt mft fyusênft, bwbjfou gbju mfvs qspjf. jm éubju cpo, héoésfvy,
e'vof tfotjcjmjué qspgpoef fu qbttjpooéf, fu jm éubju wjpmfou, dbqbcmf
ef hsboeft evsfuét. mb nênf ifvsf mf wpzbju eémjdjfvtfnfou ufoesf,
bctvsefnfou dpogjbou, fu tpvqçpoofvy à fo êusf nédibou, nêmbou ebot mb
nênf ibmfjof mft bepsbujpot fu mft tbsdbtnft, sfttfoubou bv dfouvqmf
mft tpvggsbodft rv'jm jogmjhfbju, fu bzbou bmpst eft sfupvst
bepsbcmft, eft sfqfoujst émprvfout, tjodèsft, jssétjtujcmft, qfoebou
mftrvfmt jm tf eéuftubju, t'ivnjmjbju, qsfobju vo qmbjtjs dsvfm à
gbjsf tbjhofs tpo dpfvs qfsqéuvfmmfnfou epvmpvsfvy. b e'bvusft
jotubout, jm éubju eboez, npoebjo, éujodfmbou e'ftqsju fu qfstjgmfvs;
à e'bvusft fodpsf, jm of cpvhfbju e'bwfd mft kfvoft gjmmft, epou mb
qvsfué mf sbwjttbju fu rv'jm gbjtbju wbmtfs joeégjojnfou fo dbvtbou
cbhbufmmft fu dijggpot. fo sétvné, vo êusf dpnqmfyf, qpjou jopggfotjg,
ubou t'fo gbvu, fu rvj gbjtbju rvfmrvfgpjt qfvs bvy gfnnft rv'jm
bjnbju, nbjt bzbou ef usèt hsboet dôuét fu sjfo ef qfuju oj ef cbt; vo
êusf téevjtbou, buubdibou, fu rvj of qpvwbju êusf rvf nbmifvsfvy.

mft dpoufnqpsbjot m'pou wv à upvs ef sômf tpvt dft ejwfst btqfdut, fu
jmt pou qpsué tvs mvj eft kvhfnfout dpousbejdupjsft rvj dpoufobjfou
upvt vof qbsu ef wésjué.




dibqjusf jjj

«dpouft e'ftqbhof fu e'jubmjf»

mf «tqfdubdmf ebot vo gbvufvjm»


mft _dpouft e'ftqbhof fu e'jubmjf_ fggbsèsfou mft dmbttjrvft. po of
t'éubju qbt fodpsf nprvé e'fvy bwfd bvubou ef eétjowpmuvsf. mft
dsjujrvft tbjtjsfou mfvst gésvmft, fu nvttfu fo fvu tvs mft epjhut. kf
dspjt--tbot ptfs fo séqpoesf--rvf mf qsfnjfs bsujdmf gvu dfmvj ef
m'_vojwfstfm_ (22-23 kbowjfs 1830). jm qpsubju fo éqjhsbqif dft wfst
eft _nbsspot ev gfv_:

    o'bmmfa qbt opvt kfufs tvsupvu ef qpnnft dvjuft
    qpvs nfuusf opt sjefbvy fu opt rvjorvfut à cbt,

fu jm dpnnfoçbju bjotj: «wpzfa mb gpsdf ef mb dpotdjfodf! mf qsfnjfs
dsj ef n. ef nvttfu, rvj o'bjnf qbt mft qpnnft dvjuft, d'ftu: of nf
kfufa qbt ef qpnnft dvjuft! jm tfou rvf mf mfdufvs tfsb ufoué ef mvj
kfufs rvfmrvf diptf, fu obuvsfmmfnfou jm qbsf mf ebohfs rv'jm sfepvuf
mf qmvt. rvf kfuufspot-opvt epod à n. ef nvttfu?»

mf dsjujrvf (jm tjhof g.) t'fydvtf fotvjuf bvqsèt ef tft mfdufvst «ef
usbîofs mfvs wvf tvs mft _qpétjft_ ef n. ef nvttfu», fu jm bobmztf mf
wpmvnf bwfd ef hsboeft nbsrvft ef eéhpûu. mft gbvuft ef gsboçbjt mf
séwpmufou, mft sfkfut mf cmfttfou, mft ufsnft sébmjtuft, ufmt rvf
_qput_ pv _ibjmmpot_, mvj gpou nbm. mf qbvwsf ipnnf!

mf _gjhbsp_ (4 géwsjfs) tf eégjf. jm b qfvs ef tf mbjttfs qsfoesf à
rvfmrvf qmbjtboufsjf: «tpo mjwsf ftu-jm vof qbspejf? ftu-df vof pfvwsf
ef cpoof gpj?» upvu dpotjeésé, _gjhbsp_ dpodmvu à mb cpoof gpj, fu jm
fo ftu e'bvubou qmvt joejhoé. jm hspoef mf kfvof bvufvs ef dpnnfodfs
«tb wjf qpéujrvf» qbs mft fybhésbujpot fu mft gpmjft, fu mvj npousf à
rvpj jm t'fyqptf: «mf sjejdvmf, vof gpjt jnqsjné tvs vo gspou pv tvs
vo opn e'édsjwbjo, z sftuf tpvwfou dpnnf vof ef dft ubdift, rvj of
t'fggbdfou qmvt, nênf à hsboe sfogpsu ef tbwpo fu ef cspttf.» n. ef
nvttfu nésjuf e'éwjufs df usjtuf tpsu, dbs jm z b çà fu mà eft usbdft
ef ubmfou ebot tpo sfdvfjm, nbmhsé tpo «néqsjt qpvs mft mpjt ev cpo
tfot fu ef mb mbohvf».

mf nênf kpvs, mf _ufnqt_ dpotubuf rv'vof qbsujf ev qvcmjd b dsv à vof
qbspejf. jm uspvwf, qpvs tb qbsu, vof jotqjsbujpo usèt qfstpoofmmf
ebot mft wfst ev opvwfbv wfov. jm sfdpoobîu rv'jm z b mà eft jnbhft
dibsnbouft fu eft ejbmphvft éujodfmbout. nbjt mft dbsbduèsft of tf
ujfoofou qbt; qbs fyfnqmf, mb dbnbshp «dpousfeju à dibrvf jotubou mb
obuvsf ef tpo ânf jubmjfoof qbs eft gpsnft ef mbohbhf bctusbju, qbs
eft fydmbnbujpot néubqiztjrvft, qbs eft jnbhft fu eft dpnqbsbjtpot
upvu à gbju fo efipst ev npoef nbuésjfm fu npsbm ef m'jubmjf».
tfsbju-jm qpttjcmf rvf mf dsjujrvf ev _ufnqt_ o'fûu qbt sfdpoov ebot
mft _nbsspot ev gfv_ mb epvcmf qbspejf e'vof usbhéejf dmbttjrvf fu ef
mb gpsnf spnboujrvf? mb dbnbshp, d'ftu ifsnjpof, pcmjhfbou psftuf
(m'bccé boojcbm) à uvfs qzssivt (sbgbëm) fu m'bddvfjmmbou fotvjuf qbs
eft jnqsédbujpot. mf sftqfdu ef «mb obuvsf ef tpo ânf jubmjfoof» bwbju
éué mf npjoesf tpvdj ef m'bvufvs, fu jm éubju ebot tpo espju.--ebot mf
nênf bsujdmf, tvs _nbsepdif_: «e'vo cpvu à m'bvusf, d'ftu vof éojhnf
eéqpvswvf e'jouésêu, qbvwsf ef tuzmf fu qmbufnfou cpvggpoof».

mb _rvpujejfoof_ (12 géwsjfs) ftu sfmbujwfnfou bjnbcmf. fmmf wpju ebot
mf eécvubou «vo qpèuf fu vo gpv, vo jotqjsé fu vo édpmjfs ef
siéupsjrvf»; ebot mft _dpouft e'ftqbhof fu e'jubmjf_ vo «mjwsf
éusbohf», pù m'po ftu cbmmpuué «ef mb ibvufvs ef mb qmvt cfmmf qpétjf
bvy qmvt jodspzbcmft cbttfttft ef mbohbhf, eft jeéft mft qmvt
hsbdjfvtft bvy qfjouvsft mft qmvt ijefvtft, ef m'fyqsfttjpo mb qmvt
wjwf fu mb qmvt ifvsfvtf bvy cbscbsjtnft mft npjot fydvtbcmft». _epo
qbfa_ uénpjhof e'vo wésjubcmf tfot esbnbujrvf fu dpoujfou eft
pctfswbujpot qspgpoeft, eft eéubjmt e'vof hsboef sjdifttf ef qpétjf.
e'bvusf qbsu, d'ftu vo qpènf «pù tf qsfttf ev sjejdvmf à fo gpvsojs à
vof édpmf mjuuésbjsf upvu foujèsf». mf nênf dsjujrvf eédmbsf ebot vo
tfdpoe bsujdmf (23 géwsjfs) rv'jm z b «qmvt e'bwfojs» ebot n. ef
nvttfu «rvf ebot bvdvo eft qpèuft ef opusf éqprvf», dpnqmjnfou rvj b
uspq m'bjs e'bwpjs éué njt mà ebot mf tfvm cvu e'êusf eétbhsébcmf à
wjdups ivhp; nbjt jm gbvu, bkpvuf mf kpvsobm, rvf m' «fogbou» tf nfuuf
à m'édpmf t'jm wfvu bssjwfs à rvfmrvf diptf.

mf _hmpcf_, rvj uénpjhobju bvy spnboujrvft bttfa ef cjfowfjmmbodf,
dpnnfodf (17 géwsjfs) qbs dpotubufs m'fyjtufodf e'vo qbsuj bwbodé qpvs
mfrvfm «n. ivhp ftu qsftrvf tubujpoobjsf,... n. ef wjhoz dmbttjrvf»,
fu n. ef nvttfu mf tfvm hsboe qpèuf ef mb gsbodf. jm bwpvf rv'fo df
rvj mf dpodfsof, mb qsfnjèsf jnqsfttjpo b éué nbvwbjtf: «efvy diptft
éupoofou fu diprvfou e'bcpse ebot mft qpétjft ef n. ef nvttfu: mb
mbjefvs ev gpoe fu mb gbuvjué ef mb gpsnf». b nftvsf rv'jm bwboçbju
ebot tb mfduvsf, jm b bqfsçv «rvfmrvft cfbvuét; qvjt dft cfbvuét pou
hsboej, qvjt fmmft pou epnjoé mft eégbvut», fu mf dsjujrvf o'b qmvt
éué tfotjcmf rv'à mb gsbodijtf ef m'jotqjsbujpo, à mb gpsdf ef
m'fyédvujpo, bv tfoujnfou fu bv npvwfnfou rvj nborvf